---
layout: post
author: Dougie
category: raspi
tags: raspi electronics long
published: false
---

This is rabbit hole of a post. If you're reading it I'd have a cup of coffee with it. As is my want, I've started with an online article and gone off finding out anything that's not explained.

A while ago I picked up an [LED Shim](https://shop.pimoroni.com/products/led-shim). 28 RGB LED in a row, the shim slides over the Pi's GPIO pins. Truth be told I never got it to work, assuming it was making a poor connection. I gave it another go last night, adjusted it a little and it sprang into life.

It uses the I<sup>2</sup>C bus, also known as Inter-integrated Circuit Protocol. Invented by Philips in 1982, it allows communication between controller and peripheral integrated circuits (IC) within a device. The advantages of I<sup>2</sup>C are that it's synchronous and allows multiple controllers.
<!-- more -->

## What do we mean by synchronous?
The clock data is transmitted with the message.

## What do we mean by multiple controllers?
With the LED shim, we could fit another HAT on top. Now there are two peripherals on the same connections and we'd want to be able to talk to either.

## How does it work?
Using two wires the protocol can support 1008 peripherals and the current standard ([2015](https://www.nxp.com/docs/en/user-guide/UM10204.pdf)) has a maximum speed of 5 Mbit/s.

### Standards
This is usually split up as: standard (100 kbps);  fast (400 kbps); high speed (3.4 Mbps); ultra fast (5 Mbps).

Not all controllers support all modes and standard mode devices cannot communicate with the other modes.

I<sup>2</sup>C uses 2 signals - Serial Clock Line (SCL) and Serial Data Line (SDA)[^1].

[^1]: After a good deal of searching I can't find why SDA is the abbreviation for Serial Data Line. I did notice a description on another protocol where a reference line is used, called SD0 so maybe that's it?
